Database
Database is a physical container for collections.
Each database gets its own set of files on the file system.
A single MongoDB server typically has multiple databases.

---------
The keys in a document are strings. Any UTF-8 character is allowed in a key, with a few
notable exceptions:
• Keys must not contain the character \0 (the null character). This character is used
to signify the end of a key.
• The . and $ characters have some special properties and should be used only in
certain circumstances

-----------------

A collection is identified by its name. Collection names can be any UTF-8 string, with
a few restrictions:
• The empty string ("") is not a valid collection name.
• Collection names may not contain the character \0 (the null character) because
this delineates the end of a collection name.
• You should not create any collections that start with system., a prefix reserved for
internal collections. For example, the system.users collection contains the database’s
Collections | 9
users, and the system.namespaces collection contains information about all of the
database’s collections.
• User-created collections should not contain the reserved character $ in the name.
The various drivers available for the database do support using $ in collection names
because some system-generated collections contain it. You should not use $ in a
name unless you are accessing one of these collections.

------------------
MongoDB is type-sensitive and case-sensitive. For example, these documents are
distinct:
{"foo" : 3}
{"foo" : "3"}
as are as these:
{"foo" : 3}
{"Foo" : 3}
A final important thing to note is that documents in MongoDB cannot contain duplicate
keys. For example, the following is not a legal document:
{"greeting" : "Hello, world!", "greeting" : "Hello, MongoDB!"}

Key/value pairs in documents are ordered: {"x" : 1, "y" : 2} is not the same as
{"y" : 2, "x" : 1}. 
---------------

MongoDB Startup
When run with no arguments, mongod will use the default data directory, /data/db/ (or
\data\db\ on the current volume on Windows). If the data directory does not already
exist or is not writable, the server will fail to start. 

By default MongoDB listens for socket connections on port 27017.

-----------------

Data Types
 JSON’s capabilities are limited because the only types are
null, boolean, numeric, string, array, and object.

 The most common types are:

null
Null can be used to represent both a null value and a nonexistent field:
{"x" : null}

boolean
There is a boolean type, which can be used for the values true and false:
{"x" : true}

number
The shell defaults to using 64-bit floating point numbers. Thus, these numbers look
“normal” in the shell:
{"x" : 3.14}
or:
{"x" : 3}
For integers, use the NumberInt or NumberLong classes, which represent 4-byte or
8-byte signed integers, respectively.
{"x" : NumberInt("3")}
{"x" : NumberLong("3")}

string
Any string of UTF-8 characters can be represented using the string type:
{"x" : "foobar"}

date
Dates are stored as milliseconds since the epoch. The time zone is not stored:
{"x" : new Date()}

array
Sets or lists of values can be represented as arrays:
{"x" : ["a", "b", "c"]}

embedded document
Documents can contain entire documents embedded as values in a parent
document:
{"x" : {"foo" : "bar"}}

object id
{"x" : ObjectId()}

0 1 2 3   	4 5 6   	7 8 	9 10 11
Timestamp 	Machine 	PID 	Increment

------------------------------------
To connect to a mongod on a different machine
$ mongo some-host:30000/myDB

If you start the shell with --nodb, it will start up without attempting to connect to
anything:
$ mongo --nodb
MongoDB shell version: 2.4.0


Once started, you can connect to a mongod at your leisure by running new Mon
go(hostname):
> conn = new Mongo("some-host:30000")
connection to some-host:30000
> db = conn.getDB("myDB")
myDB

